Monitoring systems usually employ the concepts of metrics, alarms and severities to communicate a problem to the user. When a certain condition is met for a certain metric, an alarm is triggered with a severity level indicating the criticalness of the alarm. For instance, a system monitoring virtual infrastructure may have certain conditions set for the memory utilization metric of the virtual machines it is monitoring. The conditions may be seen as thresholds: when memory utilization exceeds 70%, an alarm with a WARNING severity may be triggered for the related virtual machine. Similarly, if utilization exceeds 80% and 90%, the alarm severity could change to CRITICAL and FATAL respectively. As a virtual machine consumes more memory, the user is notified with an alarm of the appropriate severity level when a threshold is exceeded.

For a network administrator (i.e., a user of a monitoring system), it is often useful to be able to view the network end to end in order to understand the relationships among network nodes and how an issue at a particular node could affect other nodes.  In a system monitoring a network consisting of thousands (or more) nodes, it is often beneficial for the user to be able to focus on the key issues in the network. There may be a large number of performance metrics and thereby a large number of alarms that apply to a particular node in the network. All this information can be overwhelming for users and distract them from being able to identify the key problems in their network.

The NetFocus project takes this real world situation and provides an algorithm to identify the most critical issues in a user's network, in an attempt to empower the user to gradually bring the network back to good health by focusing on the most important problems first.

Netfocus offers a simple model of a monitoring system and the algorithm uses metric values and alarm severities to determine which of the currently active alarms is of the highest importance for a single network node.
